# The soil will save us: how scientists, farmers, and foodies are healing the soil to save the planet
Kristin Ohlson, 2014

# Introduction

Ohlson described her history of lawn woes, largely due to apathy, before a change in 2011. Many solutions involved chemicals, but she settled on a recommendation of aeration, compost and reseeding. She didn't have enough compost, but covered the lawn with fallen leaves instead of disposing of them.

Cleveland restauranteur Parker Bosley sought local ingredients since late 1980s and influenced farmers to sell directly and improve quality all around. He alerted Ohlson to "carbon farming" or "soil farming" or "microbe farming", practice taking hold among small farmers. Even the 70% (American Farm Bureau) who don't believe in global warming still took part due to benefits to lands, crops and animals.
# Chapter 1: Where Did All the Carbon Go?

Humans began farming more than 10,000 years ago and were plowing by 2500 BCE. By the 1980s, scientists and the U.S. government have recognized a connection between loss of carbon in farmed soils and greenhouse gases that apparently cause global climate change. Studies found cultivated lands worldwide have lost 80% or more of soil carbon, largely due to tilling, removal of plant waste, overgrazing due to captive herds and use of chemicals, all of which destroys the soil microbiome. Soil scientists and visionary (mostly small and educated) farmers are finding ways to reverse the trend, often by taking cues from nature:  no tilling, no chemicals, herds of free range animals, scattering plant waste on the fields. Benefits include better water absorption, drought tolerance, healthier plants and animals and carbon sequestration. Changing farming practices worldwide might reverse the rise of atmospheric carbon dioxide. Policymakers are taking note but have not much followed through, but the growth of small farmers and interested groups is a promising trend.
* Farmer Abe Collins transformed his land using Rattan Lal and others' ideas and became soil carbon evangelist* Rattan Lal, director of Ohio State University's Carbon Management and Sequestration Center (C-MASC) speaks around world about connection between soil carbon and global warming.
    * Plot 87 of the Waterman Agricultural and Natural Resources Laboratory
    * Book: The Potential of US Cropland to Sequester Carbon and Mitigate the Greenhouse Effect
    * no till agriculture: plowing damages soil structure and exposes soil carbon to oxygen, causing it to float off as CO2
    * recycle crop residue by chopping up and spreading on soil, reducing erosion, regulating temperature, feeding organisms that aerate and enrich soil, making it porous and absorbent
* Lal worked in Africa 13 years researching ways to help local farmers, who practiced slash and burn techniques, resulting in fields lasting only a few years and diminishing forest remaining.
* Broadened perspective when visited in 1982 by Roger Revelle, oceanographer who was among first to connect rising greenhouse gases with climate change.
* By 1987, USDA and the EPA started monitoring; Lal and others formed soil carbon working group to quantify loss and determine recovery prospects.
* Farming started up to 13,000 years ago, with simple tools by 5000 BCE and animal driven plows by 2500BCE.
    * Nature hasn't evolved to account for repeated soil perturbations!
    * Modern farming even worse because heavy machinery compacts soil, requiring even deeper plowing.
    * Before humans, herds of roaming animals grazed on plants and left manure, never staying in one place long due to predators. Now, without fear of predators, animals in small fenced areas eat plants to ground and even pull out roots.
    * This stops plant photosynthesis from storing carbon in soil as humus, long lasting carbon molecule networks, which fertilizes and gives airy texture.
* Lal led studies calculating Ohio lost 50% soil carbon in last 200 years, and in areas of world with longer cultivation history, 80% or more.
* **Prospects to fix**
    * While many clean energy projects aim to reduce emissions, none will reduce existing CO2 without great expense.
    * "The greatest opportunities are in the parts of the world where carbon has been most depleted by thousands of years of farming, in sub-Saharan Africa, south and central Asia, and Central America."
    * Lal thinks 3 billion tons of carbon can be sequestered annually in world's soils, reducing CO2 by 3ppm yearly; others  more optimistic, esp outside academia
    * Lal spoke to Congress six times, seven intl conferences in 2011 alone addressed soil/climate, but not much followthrough: “I tell them about 25-year sustainability plans, but they only have a four-year span of attention.”* **agrarian renaissance due to demand for sustainably raised foods**
    * number of small farmers (often college educated) in the U.S. growing for first time since Great Depression
    * reducing or eliminating fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, hormones, antibiotics, etc., letting animals graze on grass instead of forcing unnatural diets => soil gets blacker, richer with carbon
    * new farmers becoming citizen scientists and entrepreneurs looking to get paid for carbon crop
    * environmental community leery of softening emissions reduction pressure on energy and industry sectors
# Chapter 2: The Marriage of Light and Dark
Plants and myriad soil organisms have a long evolutionary history of interdependence that we are only just starting to understand. In addition to producing healthier plants, healthy soils provide drought protection, flood prevention, purification of water and carbon sequestration. With greenhouse gases skyrocketing as they are, soil based carbon sequestration may be the only viable option to reverse global climate change.* Original “polluters” were cyanobacteria—blue-green photosynthetic, aquatic bacteria that gave rise to plants—which began to change the balance of gases in our atmosphere some 2.9 BYA when planet was around 1.6 BYO.
    * Probably first were archaea (“ancient”) that live deep in the ocean near volcanic vents.    * Bacteria evolved 3.5 BYA and lived in ocean (not enough oxygen in atmosphere to protect from sun’s killer ultraviolet light).
    * First photoautotrophs were purple bacteria that captured light with pigment similar to the heme pigment in blood. Electrons from sulfur powered the conversion of solar energy into cellular energy.
    * After cyanobacteria got electrons from water (liberating oxygen), they could now spread further. Earth’s atmosphere was ammonia, carbon dioxide, hydrogen sulfide, and methane, with a mere 2 percent oxygen; cyanobacteria cranked it up to 21 percent.
    * An alga swallowed a cyanobacterium 1.6 BYA; photosynthetic algae used green chlorophylls to absorb light from highly energetic blue and red wavelengths.
    * Ample energy led to multicellular organisms.
    * Plants and cyanobacteria require carbon dioxide to produce sugars; every cell in a plant contains chlorophyll and thus carries on photosynthesis.
* Mutually beneficial relationships cycling nutrients formed.
    * Bacteria and cyanobacteria broke down rock to minerals, fungi recycled organic waste.
    * Plants evolved to use "soil food web", produce root exudates and leak up to 40% of their carbon sugars .
    * Microorganisms exchange by solubilizing nutrients (from sand, silt and clay) needed to build mass and create enzymes for biological activity.
    * Teaspoonful of healthy soil contains 1–7 billion organisms, as many as 75,000 species of bacteria, 25,000 species of fungi, 1,000 species of protozoa, and 100 species of nematodes.
    * Later came mycorrhizae ("fungi"+"roots") that connected root systems of many plants, exchanging sugar for nutrients, enabling grasses to evolve to shrubs and trees.* Microorganisms first discovered 1600s; not recognized as beneficial till late 1800s when soil scientists found fungal hyphae everywhere with healthy plants but not in human disturbed areas.
* Further descriptions carried out, but little studying function, possibly due to lack of funding and difficulty. Microorganisms in the soil are part of a complex system and can’t really be understood in isolation. Some 99 percent of soil organisms can’t be grown in a lab for study.* First understanding in 1980s when biologist Dave Coleman urged his Natural Resource Ecology Lab (NREL) at Colorado State University to start trying to figure it out.
* Hired microbiologist Elaine Ingham to investigate complex roles and relationships among the soil biology.
    * Five groups of microorganisms: fungi, bacteria, mobile one-celled organisms called protozoa, tiny worms called nematodes, and microarthropods, which are related to crustaceans and insects.
    * Visible organisms: earthworms, beetles, voles, etc.
* NREL learned virtually all plants rely on soil microbes intertwined with roots that can extend 200 feet down; even some grasses have 15 foot roots, and microbes have been found as far as 10 miles down in soil.
* Learning of more and more nutrients plants need, and they get all from soil or air with help of microorganisms.
    * Fungi deposit some directly inside root cells.
    * Others such as cobalt and sulfur must be swallowed by bacteria swallowed by protozoa or nematodes or microarthropods and then excreted near root.
    * Carbon comes from the air without help.
    * Bacteria convert atmospheric nitrogen to form usable by legume plants, which then die and disperse the nitrogen to other plants through the soil.* Mycorrhizal fungi work with many plants and can shoot out their hyphae 250 yards connecting many different plants.* Bacteria more particular; some evolved to eat a particular kind of carbon sugar and will only cluster around a few kinds of plants. Could explain difficulty in restoring degraded habitats.* Bacteria also can be specialized for conditions like temperature and moisture level; some species may be present but not productive till conditions are right.
* Soil aggregates form by bacteria glueing themselves to silt with carbon glue formed from the sugars, forming structure with space for water and gases, which bacteria need to breathe. Then fungi bundle their reproductive parts inside a shall of these structures for protection from predatory microarthropods.
* Clay is tiny rods that line up and prevent water flow, while sand is large particles that can't hold water. In both cases, soil aggregates solve the problem by either jumbling the rods or forming tiny dams among the large grains.* Greenhouse gases     * Jean-Baptiste Joseph Fourier noted in the early 1800s suggested that our atmosphere provides an insulating blanket which keeps us warm.
    * Later that century, John Tyndall showed atmospheric gases like water vapor and carbon dioxide could absorb and emit enough radiant heat to control the planet’s temperature.
    * In 1896 Svante Arrhenius showed changing atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide might explain earth’s cycle of ice ages and temperate periods, and noted that humans might have an influence on this concentration through the burning of coal.
    * In 1938 Guy Stewart Callendar pointed out the links among fossil fuel combustion, rising CO2 levels, and rises in world temperature.
    * In 1959 Bert Bolin and Erik Eriksson showed only some CO2 was absorbed by the ocean, but most drifted back into the atmosphere.
    * In 1958 Harry Wexler of U.S. Weather Bureau secured funding for a permanent station at the Mauna Loa Observatory in Hawaii to monitor the gas and tapped a young research chemist named Charles Keeling, who discovered an accurate way to measure atmospheric carbon dioxide and pegged it at 310 parts per million. 
    * In 2005 was 380 ppm; by 2013 was 400 ppm. Stopping all fossil fuel use now would still leave legacy load that'd take thousands of years to dissipate.
    * Handful of scientists and entrepreneurs have plans to remove this legacy load but so far the ideas either have frightening caveats attached or are prohibitively expensive.
* The soil carbon cycle results in longer and longer chains of thousands of carbon atoms, making soil darker.
* Soil chemists called carbon chain compounds "organic" for hundreds of years. Jerome Irving Rodale used term in 1940s for nutritious food produced by agriculture that worked with nature.
* Only 1 to 10 percent of carbon entering soil gets locked away as humin, which can last centuries. (Kristine Nichols, a soil microbiologist with the USDA’s Northern Great Plains Research Laboratory in North Dakota)

# Chapter 3: Send In the Cows
Human activity over thousands of years has caused biodiversity loss, desertification, and climate change. Allan Savory and others are evangelizing the idea modern land management practices like reducing herds and burning grasses are making the problems worse, and holistic management can reverse the damage. This involves herding larger numbers of animals to trample grasses into the soil and adapting treatment based on results. Scientists don't all accept his methods, but they are difficult to study under the reductionist system. Still, HM is catching on among 10,000+ ranchers impressed by the results of HM and frustrated by failures of established practices.

* Allan Savory (born 1936 Southern Rhodesia, now Zimbabwe) with wife Jody Butterfield wrote book "Holistic Management: A New Framework for Decision Making".
* We long assumed the land was degrading because too many cattle were also grazing the savannas.
* Humans have long been hard on the environment; before 200 years ago, people actually had larger average footprint than now, per person. 75 percent total global deforestation occurred before 1850.
* Populations exploded and deforestation became rampant in Europe and China about 8,000 years ago, releasing carbon through burning forests and degraded soils and also methane from wetlands, irrigated rice fields, and livestock.
* Early humans created huge deserts in areas where humans have lived the longest, including the Sahara and the Tihama in Saudi Arabia and Yemen.
* Modern land management's burning of grasses only intensified problem.
* After observing many cases of animal removal not halting degradation, Savory thought land might have passed a point of no return. Then saw Scottish lands get harshly overgrazed but then healed when rested.
* Started going barefoot in 1960s civil war where he served as a tracker combat unit and honed his skills reading the land. Savory realized that animals in their natural state had a positive effect on brittle landscapes.
* Realized animals that stayed in close herds for protection trampled into the soil grasses that would otherwise oxidize, weather and block sunlight for seedlings.
* Savory doesn’t claim that he was the first to notice the connection between large numbers of herding animals and soil health—folk wisdom from various countries held that animals could improve the land with their hooves.
* Domestic cattle graze their favorite grass type to the ground till roots die, then move on to next. People assumed this was natural.
* Savory went to South Africa to see how farmer John Acocks kept his cattle in small areas for short amounts of time to prevent overgrazing.
* French scientist André Voisin explained in "Grass Productivity" 60 years earlier overgrazing was determined not by the number of animals on a plot of land, but on how long they stayed there.
* “When you graze and then let the plants recover, they pulse carbon and moisture into the soil,” Savory explained. “Trees don’t do the same thing. That’s why grasslands are so important to carbon cycling.”
* By the mid-1960s, Savory flipped his political alliances; instead of tracking black guerillas, he was now the leading voice of white opposition in parliament to the racist Ian Smith government. His interest in politics had stemmed initially from his conviction that environmentalists needed to get into politics. But just as he didn’t believe in separating the science of plants from the science of animals, he couldn’t separate what was happening on the land from the fate of people who lived on the land. “I wore many hats at that time,” Savory told me. “But whatever hat I was wearing, I was always interested in poor land leading to the loss of wildlife, to poverty and violence, to the abuse of women and children, to political upheaval. In my mind, it was always the same thing.”
* Savory became an independent researcher, consultant and rancher after becoming frustrated when he couldn't publish in peer reviewed journals and couldn't convince range managers to change everything they believed.
* Savory’s definition of desertification was becoming more nuanced, measured space between grass plants and roots sticking in air due to soil erosion.
* "…developed an approach for healing the land that is now known as holistic planned grazing. It departs from all other land management strategies in that the process begins by asking farmers and ranchers to describe the lives they want to lead based on their deepest cultural, spiritual, and material values and to identify ways of working on the land that would support these lives for thousands of years."
* Savory first encountered this kind of holistic framework when he studied the work of Jan Smuts, a South African lawyer, botanist, soldier, and two-time prime minister of South Africa. Later praised by Albert Einstein as having ideated the other of the two concepts—including his own theory of relativity—that would be important to the future of humanity, Smuts believed that nature functions in wholes and patterns, that it is a complicated system that humans erroneously approach as a complex machine. When we interact with nature mechanistically and assume we need only remove or change one cog to fix a problem, we are bound to incur unintended consequences that are often worse than the problem.
* Our ignorance about the holistic nature of our environment is best expressed by the way we approach our most pressing environmental problems. “**The three great issues of the day are biodiversity loss, desertification, and climate change**,” he said. “Each is being addressed separately by different institutions and even within such institutions—universities, environmental organizations, governments and international agencies, and in separate international conferences. Yet **they are one and the same inseparable issue**.”
* Savory rankles many in mainstream and academic science, and others are more accepting, but still feel that Savory’s methods have not been adequately proved by well-controlled studies.
    * In November 2012, a group called Managing Change Northwest invited Savory to speak to the Washington Cattlemen’s Association, the Tilth Producers of Washington, and the Seattle public. Chad Kruger, director of Washington State University’s Center for Sustaining Agriculture and Natural Resources (CSANR), helped organize the event, then posted his reflections about Savory online. He noted that some critics have concluded that the science supporting Savory’s approach “is either anecdotal or statistically inconclusive because the experiments were poorly designed (they didn’t isolate single variables for analysis). . . . While I don’t think that critiques are necessarily a definite dismissal of the legitimacy of HM [Savory’s holistic management system], I do think they raise an extremely valid question . . . ‘Where’s the data?’ ”
    * Savory's methods don't lend well to reductionist study because they involve changing practices in response to conditions and results, and also they take 5 years or longer, beyond the funding scope of most scientific experiments.
    * Still, now 10,000 ranchers doing holistic management and growing.

# See also
Worldwatch Institute issued a 40-page report about the connectionbetween soil and climate in 2010. The National Wildlife Federation has targeted globalwarming as the single greatest threat to wildlife and issued a report in 2011 on “futurefriendlyfarming” that can mitigate climate change.